In April of 191 BC, Rome found itself
facing off against the Greek army at
Thermopylae.
Even knowing full well the story of
Leonidas and the 300, it was now the
legions which were plunging headlong
through the hot gates into the teeth of
defensive entrenchments.
But unlike in the past, these defenses
boasted double walls manned by
artillery, thousands of pikemen, swarms
of skirmishers, and even war elephants.
This engagement had been a carefully
crafted maneuver by King Antiochus of
the Seleucid Empire, who in just the
last few months had launched a lightning
blitz to claim vast swaths of Greece.
The battle which was to unfold in these
next moments would be the first true
test between the superpowers of the East
and West.
This is the trial by fire of the
Seleucid War.
Every generation in history has had to
ride this roller coaster of hard times.
Now, in our own period today, this is a
financial issue where we have to fight
against rising costs and the threat of a
looming crash. But between an irrational
market, tanking crypto, precious metals
that go up and down, it's really hard to
know where is the safest option. Now, if
you're risk-averse like me, I can
definitely recommend today's sponsor
Bankrate. They offer a platform to
compare the best offers on high-yield
savings accounts. Now, as you likely
know, your typical low-yield savings
account only nets you about 0.5% on
average annually.
But there's a lot of banks that offer
other ways that you can invest your
money through things like high-yield
savings account that can get you up to 4
or even 5% on your money.
By using Bankrate's comparison tools,
you can quickly see who offers services
in your area, what their ratings are, if
they're FDIC or NCUA insured, and what
you can expect for returns on your
deposit. Once you find a good option you
like, you can click through to that
bank's website and submit an application
to open an account. Right now, inflation
is eating away at all our money. So,
start safeguarding your financial
situation with Bankrate by clicking the
QR code above or the link in the
description. Stay smart, do your
research, and be safe out there.
At the dawn of the 2nd century BC, the
empires of Rome and the Seleucids faced
off across the Mediterranean.
Separated by the buffer territory of
Greece, neither was quite ready to come
to blows.
However, the chaotic nature of the Greek
city-states soon threatened to suck both
superpowers into a growing conflict.
The Aetolian League was perhaps the most
problematic player at the beginning of
this mess.
Not only were they constantly
threatening and backstabbing their
neighbors with various schemes, but when
consequences came hurtling their way,
they were quick to cry foul and call
upon the foreign Seleucids, rather than
Rome, to save them and their freedom.
Despite the provocation, Rome's response
was tepid at best.
True, they sent ambassadors and
diplomats, but no real military response
to the aggression was evidence.
And so, looking at the situation, it
could be inferred that Rome was allowing
the Greek city-states to sort themselves
out.
Antiochus, deciding that it was
therefore up to him to maintain some
semblance of order in Greece, and thus
ensure order among the Ionian Greeks,
moved in to fill the void that Rome had
left.
He did so carefully. Not wanting to be
seen as yet another Eastern king at the
head of a great horde, he brought a
relatively small army with only 10,000
infantry, 500 cavalry, and six
elephants.
For one of the most powerful men in the
world, it was essentially an extensive
honor guard.
In 192 BC,
these troops landed and camped outside
the city walls of Demetrias.
Here, the Aetolians quickly proclaimed
Antiochus as the commander-in-chief of
all forces in the alliance.
Though the move was largely symbolic, it
nonetheless reinforced the idea that the
Seleucids had just officially entered
the arena of Greek affairs.
Yet for the time being, Rome seemed
unresponsive.
And so, Antiochus made swift moves to
conclude his campaign before the
sleeping giant awoke.
The overall goal appears to have been to
secure control of the three so-called
fetters of Greece,
Demetrias, Chalcis, and Corinth, whose
fortified locations granted one
strategic control of the region.
So far, the Aetolians had succeeded in
taking Demetrias, but failed in taking
Chalcis.
But now, with the help of the Seleucids,
this second fetter could be captured.
Chalcis, in a panic, sent ambassadors
begging for help from the Roman alliance
states in Greece.
The most important of these was Achaea,
ruled by the city of Athens.
It was there that the emissaries from
Chalcis arrived, while ambassadors from
Aetolia, Antiochus, and Rome were also
present.
Livy presents a dramatic and theatrical
production with competing speeches
between the ambassadors. [music]
In reality, Rome had already ensured an
alliance between themselves and the
Achaeans.
The Aetolian and Seleucid ambassadors
were there for political theater and
nothing more.
The arrival of the embassy from Chalcis
was an unexpected boon, but not an
unwelcome one.
It served as the catalyst to convince
the Athenians that Antiochus was on the
course of conquest, and that only Rome
could make good their freedom.
Thus, an anti-Seleucid coalition quickly
emerged, and they mobilized for war.
Affairs began quite slowly at first.
Just 500 men were sent out by both the
Romans and the Achaeans to reinforce
Chalcis.
The Greek contingent arrived first,
slipping quickly into the city as crowds
cheered their arrival.
The Romans, meanwhile, advanced more
slowly.
The delay came when they were blocked
from fording a river by the
significantly larger Seleucid force,
which had also entered the area to
establish a blockade of Chalcis.
Yet neither Rome nor the Seleucids were
technically at war.
Thus, the blockade was not necessarily
enforceable.
The Roman commander called the bluff.
Undaunted, he now led his troops further
along the coast to where a ferry might
carry them to the other side.
This lax attitude proved so pervasive
that the Romans dropped almost all
discipline.
Livy even claims that along the way,
soldiers broke off to tour the local
area, eager to see the landmarks and
bring back stories of adventure to their
families.
But this gross overconfidence would
prove to be a terrible mistake.
One day, when the two armies were
closely encamped, an enterprising
Seleucid commander lashed out at the
arrogant Romans to make an example of
them.
Whether he meant it as a mere threat or
an actual attack didn't matter. As the
Seleucids charged, they encountered
neither lookout nor guard.
Thus, with no resistance, their momentum
carried the attackers right into the
midst of the camp. In the chaos which
ensued, half of the bewildered Romans
would be slaughtered and hunted down.
The remaining few that survived either
melted away into the countryside or
stumbled into Chalcis.
Thus, the citizens of the beleaguered
city fell into a panic.
Just the day before, reinforcements had
been promised to arrive to make good on
their defense.
Now, the tattered, embarrassing remains
of these so-called saviors were busy
binding their wounds in the safety of a
local fortress.
Trust in the alliance was shattered.
Thus, when a Seleucid delegation
returned to the city requesting their
surrender, the people had a different
tune to sing.
The anti-Roman faction seized control of
Chalcis, kicking out the allied garrison
and opening the doors to the would-be
conquerors.
In one fell swoop, Antiochus had now
taken the second fetter of Greece.
When news of this event reached Rome,
embarrassment quickly turned to rage. In
short order, war was officially declared
against the Aetolian League and its new
ally, King Antiochus.
Yet, despite Rome's seeming inactivity
the last few months, it appears that
they'd have been carefully preparing for
this eventual escalation.
26,000 troops were already mobilized and
ready in the nearby theater of Illyria.
Now, all that remained was to conduct
the annual elections to decide who would
have the honor of leading the legions.
Ultimately, once the consuls and
tribunes were chosen, the Senate
delegated Manius Acilius Glabrio as the
overall commander-in-chief of the Greek
theater with Lucius Valerius Flaccus and
Marcus Porcius Cato as his legates.
Accompanying them would be an additional
9,000 men raised for the campaign.
All told, this put their numbers at
roughly 35,000 men.
A not insignificant force.
However, one might reasonably question
whether it would be enough to actually
out-muscle King Antiochus the Great,
ruler of the vast lands from Thrace to
India.
Unfortunately, the Roman Empire had
simply no more manpower to spare.
Outside of the Greek theater, 13 legions
were in active service elsewhere across
the realm with an additional 30,000 men
in the Roman navy.
Counting allies and support staff, this
force likely totaled some 200,000 men
simply to maintain a grip on the
Republic's vast new frontiers.
Such a mobilization was extremely
straining given the fact that Rome's
military had not yet been
professionalized, these massive armies
were all just temporary militia forces
>> [music]
>> being asked to serve year after year
hundreds of kilometers from home.
Following decades of warfare, they were
eager to return and the overwhelming
majority of Rome's manpower pools had
been depleted.
The good news for them though was that
at least for now Antiochus' army in
Greece was quite small.
The king would therefore be relying on
his notoriously unreliable Greek allies
for the bulk of his forces.
If Rome could eke out some quick
victories, it may actually convince the
king that further mobilization for an
all-out brawl was simply not worth it.
Meanwhile, on the other side of the
Mediterranean, Antiochus now had choices
to make. He would be aided in his
deliberations by Rome's great enemy,
Hannibal Barca of Carthage, who had been
forced into exile by his home city
following the end of the Second Punic
War.
While the Punic general is best
remembered for his tactical genius, he
had shown great strategic wisdom in
fighting Rome by attempting to
systematically chip away at the system
of alliances which made up the fabric of
the Republic's empire.
Thus, it would be in Greece that
Hannibal advised Antiochus to similarly
peel apart Rome's alliances.
Antiochus would do so with a diplomatic
offensive.
First to fall was Boeotia.
Located in the zone of control of
Calchas, it proved quite easy to foist
terror and stick upon them to strike an
alliance with the Seleucids.
Next came Epirus and Sparta.
While neither bowed immediately, they
didn't outright reject the king's
offers.
Perhaps with some luck and another quick
victory, they would potentially be
willing to defect from the Romans.
But not all of Greece sided so quickly
with the Seleucids.
Philip of Macedon in particular was one
of the most eager to back Rome,
immediately sending messengers to Italy
signaling his commitment of men and
supplies to the war effort.
Even when King Antiochus attempted to
court the Macedonians by honorably
burying their dead, which had been
killed by the Romans at Cynoscephalae,
Philip nonetheless contorted the
situation into an insult, declaring war
on the Seleucids for the supposed
slight.
On the surface, this behavior made
little sense.
However, it seems that Philip was
playing the long game here, betting on a
Roman victory and preemptively cozying
up to these former enemies to loosen the
terms of his treaty with them.
We should also keep in mind that he very
desperately wished to have the
restrictions on his army lifted and for
his son and heir, currently a hostage in
Rome, to be returned.
In such geopolitical maneuvers, the
Macedonians did indeed have some cards
to play.
Though their army had been capped at a
limit of 5,000 men, they were all
well-trained professionals.
Having them placed directly under the
Roman banner was thus immensely
important in bolstering the strength of
the Western alliance.
With the thawing of winter, these
diplomatic maneuvers soon gave way to
actual troop movements.
In these matters, Antiochus's first
military target was Thessaly.
Here he hoped to score some propagandic
victories and further sway northern
Greece to his side.
Yet rather than await the official start
of the campaigning season, the king
launched a preemptive blitz with the
core of his Seleucid troops.
The attack was a great success.
Thessaly, caught completely off guard,
crumbled like a house of cards.
About half the cities of the region
capitulated, swearing their loyalty to
Antiochus within just 10 days.
However, more serious resistance began
to take shape around the city of
Larissa.
It was here that advanced detachments of
the Roman army had begun to arrive.
But rather than get bogged down, King
Antiochus wisely called it an end to the
blitz.
Thus, before the bite of winter storms
and enemy reprisals could take their
toll, the Seleucid troops had already
marched safely back to their base of
operations in Chalcis.
In a further stroke of success,
operations to the west now saw many
strongholds of Acarnania bend the knee
to Seleucid troops.
Yet, when news came that the main Roman
army was making its crossing of the
Adriatic, the Seleucids drew back once
more to the safety of Chalcis.
Unfortunately, it is here that things
proved more difficult as Antiochus now
attempted to muster his Greek allies for
the campaign season ahead.
While the great king was technically the
commander-in-chief, in practice,
exerting any form of grand strategy
proved difficult given the ever-changing
whims of his allies.
After all, the bulk of his army was
composed of troops from Greek
city-states, each of whom's political
desires had to be carefully maintained
to ensure the coalition stayed together.
This was easier said than done, and
problems quickly emerged.
For instance, when Antiochus attempted
to call out the banners, the levy proved
a dismal failure. Aetolia, ever
concerned with its own affairs, declared
that it was regrettably unable to give
control of its full levy to Antiochus.
The great king, who was expecting 20,000
or more men, was instead given just
4,000.
Combined with the core Seleucid force,
this left him with just 14,000 men, a
paltry army less than half the size of
the 35,000 strong Roman army that was
now bearing down on him like an
inexorable avalanche.
In the face of such overwhelming odds,
Antiochus now turned to the one place in
Greece where an invader's numbers would
count for nothing.
The passes of Thermopylae.
Historically, the hot gates had
delivered Greece one of its most famous
defensive battles.
Even 300 years later, everyone
remembered the legend of how Leonidas
had held the Persian horde at bay in the
pass.
However, within this same heroic story
was the secret of the mountain goat
path, which had ultimately doomed the
defenders.
Considering this, both Rome and the
Seleucids would have known the strength
and the Achilles heel of the Hot Gates.
For his part, Antiochus took on the role
of the defender.
His first objective was to block down
the goat path.
This was done by deploying his 4,000
Greek allies across a series of three
mountain tops along its route.
Within the pass below, the king then set
about rebuilding the Phocian wall and
manning it with ballistas.
In front of this was dug a large ditch,
followed by a second pair of walls and
ditches.
Beyond lay the roughly 100 m wide plain
leading to the entrance of the Hot
Gates.
It would be through here that the main
thrust of the Romans would be funneled.
However, rather than waiting behind the
walls for the enemy to come to him, King
Antiochus chose to mount a vigorous
defense in front of them.
With skirmishers and artillery men
providing cover fire, he arrayed the
bulk of his 10,000 troops in the plains.
This consisted of a front screen of
peltasts and light troops, followed by
blocks of pike infantry.
Elephants and guard units held the sea
flank, while archers and slingers
secured the rough terrain on the
mountain side.
Altogether, the deployment made for a
formidable defense.
The Romans, realizing the strength of
Antiochus' position, hesitated to come
to grips with him.
At first, they tried to bait him out,
burning crops, ransacking towns, and
causing chaos in the region to elicit a
response.
But the great king did not budge.
As the days dragged on and the supplies
began to dwindle, the Romans were forced
to either pull back or to attack.
To wait and do nothing was to allow
Seleucid reinforcements from Asia the
chance to hasten their arrival.
Thus, the consul Glabrio, eager to win
glory in this most famous of sites,
committed his army to an assault.
The Roman operation would consist of two
vectors of attack.
In the main thrust, Glabrio would lead
about 20,000 troops into the jaws of the
hot gates to fix the enemy in place.
Meanwhile, his two legates, Flaccus and
Cato, were to take their pick of 4,000
men and launch a nighttime assault to
break through the flanking goat path.
Thus it was that as both armies
slumbered, the chosen Romans made ready
to move out.
With shining armor covered by cloaks and
rattling metal muffled by cloth, they
crept out into the night.
The units under Flaccus made first
contact on their approach to Mount
Tichius.
Here, the Aetolians managed to raise the
alarms and rushed to the defenses just
in time.
Fierce fighting ensued in the dark
heights. The Greeks are said to have
fought well, eventually driving the
Romans back from the position.
Flaccus proved unable to rally for a
second assault given the night
conditions, choosing instead to now fall
back to camp.
It was here that they discovered that
the Aetolians had themselves been
conducting night operations with their
own raid against the Roman positions.
Another fight ensued, this time seeing
the Greeks driven back.
Meanwhile, nothing had been heard of
Cato's men.
They were either lost or presumed dead.
By all accounts, the operation to take
the goat path had failed. It would now
be up to Glabrio and his men to win
victory in the frontal assault.
To this end, the main Roman troops have
been busy deploying into the hot gates.
But without a moment's pause, Antiochus
was upon them.
Appian reports, quote, "The enemy's
light armed troops assailed Glabrio
first, rushing in from all sides.
He received their onset bravely,
yielding, and then advancing and driving
them back.
Upon this retreat, the foe's phalanx
opened and let the light armed men pass
through. It then closed and pushed
forward, the long pike set densely
together in order of battle, with which
the Macedonians from the time of
Alexander and Philip have struck terror
into the enemies who have not dared to
encounter the thick array of pikes
presented to them.
As this impenetrable wall of spears
advanced, the ballistae on the
fortifications, the slingers in the
foothills, and the professional peltasts
in the plains exacted a heavy toll.
Yet the legions were vast in number, and
with nowhere to go but forward, they met
the challenge head on.
In this fight, the Romans were able to
slowly take ground.
However, we are told that the
professionals of the Seleucid phalanx
maintained discipline, calmly stepping
back towards their outer wall position.
Here, yet more pikemen awaited.
This second line now joined itself to
the thick layer of spears.
Rome, meanwhile, under constant fire
from the defenders, had little
opportunity to redress its line and
cycle in fresh troops.
In such a state, it's unclear how much
longer the legions could press against
the Seleucids in that deadly pass.
The grinding fight was becoming a
tactical nightmare.
Yet fortune seems to have favored the
Romans. Cato, who had previously gotten
lost while executing the nighttime
assault through the mountains, had
finally stumbled upon his target just as
the sun's rays began to shine.
By then, it was the last hour of the
night's watch, with the Greek defenders
already believing they had successfully
repulsed the Romans earlier in the
night.
Caught completely by surprise, much of
the camp was asleep.
Cato, therefore, had the advantage in
storming the position.
Nonetheless, Appian reports that a stiff
fight ensued on account of the high
rocks and precipices.
Eventually, though, the Aetolians were
driven back.
Cato's timing could not have been
better. Just as it happened with
McClusky's American dive bombers at the
Battle of Midway, their unexpectedly
late arrival had hit the enemy at
precisely its weakest moment. In both
cases, the end result was a pivotal
changing of the tides that could not
have gone better if it was actually
planned.
At Thermopylae, this sudden victory now
allowed Cato to chase the bewildered
Aetolians down the mountainside.
In doing so, he set off an avalanche of
panic among the defenders.
Appian describes the scene as follows.
"The Aetolians were seen fleeing with
loud cries and leaping down into the
camp of Antiochus. At first, neither
side knew what had happened and there
was confusion among both in their
uncertainty. But, when Cato made his
appearance pursuing the Aetolians with
shouts of victory and was already close
above the camp of Antiochus, the king's
forces took fright. Not knowing how
large Cato's force was, it was magnified
to their minds by terror."
The panic of the Seleucids now facing a
threat to the rear was made even worse
by the history of Thermopylae.
All knew that even the mighty Spartans
had been doomed by the fall of the goat
path. What victory could the Seleucids
hope for in this case?
Thus, the once orderly ranks of the
defenders collapsed. Some rushed to the
camp to mount a defense, but in the
chaos, the legions slipped through the
gates with them. What semblance of a
rear guard might have held the position
in check now also gave way.
Like the stop being pulled from an
overturned bottle, the defenders of the
hot gates spilled out in a great
confused mass.
Roman accounts claim that the Seleucid
army was captured or destroyed almost to
the man.
Only the king and his 500 strong mounted
bodyguard managed to cut a path to
safety.
The next day, Glabrio made sure to
regroup his forces and conduct careful
mopping up operations against the
remnants of the enemy force.
Antiochus, meanwhile, had escaped all
the way back to Chalcis.
Here he would prepare to sail to Ephesus
in Anatolia, his own home soil.
The great king's plan was to rendezvous
with Hannibal Barca, the bane of Rome,
and join the main Seleucid army marching
west from Asia.
From this position of relative safety,
Antiochus can now leverage the yet
untapped resources of his vast empire to
raise a navy with which to take on the
consuls at sea.
Round one may have gone to the Romans,
but the war was far from over.
Join us in our next episode as we follow
the clash of fleets and armies in Rome's
first great venture into the lands of
the east for the fate of the Seleucid
War.
For now, check us out on Patreon or
YouTube memberships to catch script
previews and download our art.
A big thanks to the current supporters
and a shoutout to the researchers,
writers, and artists for making this
episode possible. We couldn't have done
it without this team and this community.
If you enjoyed this episode, be sure to
like and subscribe for more content and
check out these other related videos.
See you in the next one.